The theme of this program is look back to learn, look ahead to live.
It's based on Isaiah, chapter 30, verse 21, which was written about 700 years before Christ.
The question is, how might we apply Isaiah 30-21 to Jehovah's people today?
The text reads, and your own ears will hear a word behind you, saying, this is the way.
Walk in it, in case you should go to the right, or in case you should go to the left.
This scripture tells us that Jehovah's word comes from behind his people, issuing directions
on the right way to walk.
When we turn to God's word for guidance, we are reading words that were recorded thousands
of years ago, coming from behind us as it were in the stream of time.
This ties in nicely with Paul's words at Romans 15-4.
For all the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction.
There are many things that we can learn by looking back at Bible characters.
Looking their attitude, conduct, and quality of faith can help us to make wise decisions
and to avoid pitfalls.
Also we need to appreciate that experience is not always the best teacher.
Some people go through life only learning lessons after making one painful mistake after
another.
It is far better to learn from examples of the past.
Looking back to our first human parents, we see clearly the importance of obeying Jehovah.
For hundreds of years, Adam and Eve must have looked back to the life they had in the
Garden of Eden before they sinned, but they felt no joy in doing so.
As they grew older and more decrepit, they must have been filled with sadness and bitterness,
and there may have been many exchanges of unkind words.
Yes, they looked back at what they lost, but it did not benefit them, for they were
created perfect and were willfully disobedient to God.
Noah, who was born about 126 years after Adam died, would have known of Adam's disobedience
and its consequences.
Noah looked back and benefited from that knowledge.
He obeyed Jehovah and fixed his eyes on the unseen future.
The foretold earth-wide flood.
Also he kept busy constructing an ark and preaching to the people of his day.
It is only reasonable to believe that Noah's three sons cooperated fully with him and
building the ark.
But what about the wives of Noah's sons?
There is no mention of their families in Scripture.
The wives of Noah's sons must have been strong in faith, determined to stick with their
husbands, and with God's servant Noah, even though none of their family members went
into the ark for survival.
The wives of Noah's sons provide an example for serious thought.
A few hundred years after the flood, Abraham and Sarah left the city of Eur to serve Jehovah.
Wherever he designated, they looked ahead and kept their eyes fixed on the promises
of God.
The Apostle Paul indicates that Abraham and Sarah did not dwell on what they left behind.
Paul makes that point in Hebrews 11-15, and what a good lesson it is for us.
Hebrews 11-15 reads,
and yet if they had kept remembering the place from which they had departed, they would
have had opportunity to return.
Like Abraham and Sarah, we want to keep our attention fixed, not on the things that we
have left behind, but rather on serving Jehovah and on his promises for the future.
Lot was a contemporary of Abraham, and there are vital lessons we can learn from the account
about Lot's wife.
Genesis 1912 and 13 tell us not only that Sodom would be destroyed, but also that Lot and
his people in the city should flee immediately.
Then verse 17 says that as soon as the angels had brought Lot and his family to the outskirts
of Sodom, they were told,
"'Escape for your life, do not look behind you, and do not stand still in any part of the
district, escape to the mountainous region so that you may not be swept away.'"
After fleeing Sodom, Lot's wife disobeyed God by looking back.
What may have been involved in her looking back?
There is nothing to indicate that she in any way approved of the immorality of Sodom,
but was her attachment to her home and the material thing she had there stronger than
her love for God?
Whatever her reason,
what Jesus said at Luke chapter 17 verses 31 and 32 emphasizes the importance of obedience
and urgency.
He said,
"'Luke 17 31, on that day let the person who is on the house top, but whose belongings
are in the house not come down to pick these up, and likewise the person out in the field
must not return to the things behind.
And notice the way Jesus now ties together urgency with obedience in verse 32.
Remember the wife of Lot.'
Genesis 1926 says that Lot's wife disobeyedly began to look back and she became a pillar
of salt.
After this thought-provoking comment on pages 18 and 19 of the April 15, 1990 issue of
the watchtower,
now a further test of loyalty faced Lot and his daughters.
Was Lot's attachment to his deceased wife or the girl's feelings for their dead mother
stronger than their love for Jehovah who had brought about this calamity?
Would they continue to obey God even though someone very close to them proved disloyal
to him?
With full trust in Jehovah, they did not look back.
Is there not a lesson in this account for us?
Moses looked to Jehovah for his blessings and not to the position of privilege that he
had in Egypt.
We want to be like Moses and not fantasize about wealth, possessions, and fame.
And what about her?
What can we learn by examining his life?
No, this is not the bend her from the movie.
This her lived during the time period of Moses and Joshua.
Like many of Jehovah's people, he played a supporting role in doing God's will.
We don't know much about him, but what we do know shows that he was available and willing
to give support to Moses.
The account recorded at Exodus chapter 17 verses 8-13 occurred shortly after the Israelites
left Egypt.
Exodus 17 8-13 reads as follows.
When the Amalakites came and fought against Israel and referred him, at this Moses said
to Joshua, choose men for us and go out to fight against the Amalakites.
Tomorrow I will stand on top of the hill with the rod of the true God in my hand.
Then Joshua did just as Moses told him, and he fought against the Amalakites, and Moses
Aaron and her went up to the top of the hill.
As long as Moses kept his hands lifted up, the Israelites prevailed, but as soon as he
would let down his hands, the Amalakites prevailed.
When the hands of Moses were heavy, they took a stone and put it under him, and he sat
on it.
When Aaron and her, one on each side, supported his hands so that his hands remained steady
until the sun set, thus Joshua defeated Amalek and his people with the sword.
The supporting role her played could be viewed as incidental, and not something extraordinary,
since many other men in Israel could have assisted Moses by holding up one of his hands.
However, we can benefit from her example.
Many brothers and sisters perform essential support work to advance Kingdom interests,
but they are rarely, if ever in the limelight, nor are they well known by the brotherhood.
But Jehovah knows who you are, and he appreciates what you do.
Hebrews chapter 6, verse 10, gives us this assurance.
Hebrews 6, 10 reads,
For God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work, and the love you showed for his name
by ministering and continuing to minister to the holy ones.
Oftentimes we humans forget about the good that others do, but Jehovah never forgets
the good works of his faithful servants.
And now consider a man who was a gross wrongdoer, guilty of the most heinous crimes and violations
of God's laws.
He was King Manasseh.
Not only does the Bible account of his repentance amaze us, but even more outstanding is the fact
that Jehovah accepted his repentance and showed him mercy.
How kind of Jehovah to allow this account to be in his word?
We look back to Manasseh who stands as an example of the great mercy that Jehovah extends
to all who genuinely repent of their wrongdoings and make straight paths for their feet.
Manasseh's repentance must have been genuine, for no one can deceive Jehovah.
And Manasseh's example should encourage those who may think that they have gone too far
astray to be forgiven and receive Jehovah's tender mercies.
How much we appreciate the brochure, return to Jehovah.
It constitutes a loving invitation to take the necessary steps to draw close to Jehovah
and then remain in his love.
We draw close to the Father through Jesus Christ.
For he himself declared at John 146, no one comes to the Father except through me.
Jesus invites us to learn from him.
In the 2015 Convention Video Drama, for a certainty God made him Lord and Christ, we
learn much about Jesus' love for people and his affection for his disciples.
Unforgettable and heartwarming was the scene of Jesus warmly embracing each disciple before
ascending to heaven.
Did Jesus actually do that?
I don't know.
But it's only reasonable to believe that he would show such affection to his loyal disciples.
After all, according to John 21, 25, Jesus did many things that are not recorded in the
scriptures and Jesus has also proved to be faithful to his promise, to be with his disciples
to the end of the system of things.
Do we not see evidence of that today?
The Apostle Peter was someone that most of us can relate to.
After Jesus' resurrection, Peter became a zealous and fearless preacher of the good news.
He did not look back on his mistakes and continue beating himself for denying Jesus three times.
He did not give up because Jesus called him Satan.
He did not quit and run away feeling sorry for himself, nor did he quit when Paul reprimanded
him in front of many disciples.
Peter was a humble man who loved Jehovah.
Here is much we can learn by looking back on Peter's life.
Never quit or give up in the race for life.
When we are disciplined, we want to imitate Peter and make the needed changes.
We put our full trust in Jesus' ransom sacrifice that does indeed cleanse us from inherited
sin and from our own mistakes.
We must not allow ourselves to be consumed by self-pity and inactivity.
Yes, there are many ways that we can benefit from looking back at Peter and learning from
his experiences.
The Apostle John was another man of great faith and endurance.
At about 99 years of age, the Apostle John looked back some 65 years and was able with
the help of Holy Spirit to remember so much about Jesus' life and works that he could
write the Gospel of John.
He looked back not only to remember what he had learned from Jesus, but also because
he wanted future generations to learn about Jesus.
But John also looked ahead with faith in Jehovah's promise about Jesus as King of the
coming kingdom, declaring in the conclusion of the Book of Revelation, Amen.
Come, Lord Jesus.
Yes, we look back to learn from God's Word and see the many ways in which it can benefit
us.
At the same time, we look ahead to the future, to the real life in the new world when we
will be able to enjoy life in ways not possible today.
How good it is to know the truth, to serve our great God, Jehovah, and to be a part of
the worldwide brotherhood.